So I I wanted to start off with uh the
the stats that I've seen around cancer
when I was doing this research which
shocked me which is that in the 1990s we
had one in four people that were to
develop cancer and today that's changed
to one in two.
what has been going on given that we've
had a improvement in science, uh we've
had advancements in technology, we're
flying people to space, but yet at the
same time we're doubling the cancer
rates. What went wrong here? Yeah. Well,
a lot of things went wrong. But that's
interesting that you mention that
because um the National Cancer Institute
uh correction the American Cancer
Society publishes a big paper every year
on cancer rates uh uh on on the number
of new cases and the number of deaths
that are projected to occur uh over the
previous or the coming year. And um and
you're absolutely right, the number of
new cases has increased uh dramatically.
I think there's in 2024 they estimated
and found over two million in the United
States uh with six almost
612,000 deaths and this comes
uh from the American Cancer Society as I
said and if you take if you take this
600 it's a 611,000 some some odd number
and if you take that number and divide
it by 365 365 days. Uh you get about uh
almost
1,700 people a day are dying from cancer
approximately when you take that bigger
number. And then if you divide that
number about
1,700 by 24, you get the number of
approximate number of people dying from
cancer each day in the United States.
And that comes to about 70 just about 70
people per hour are dying from cancer uh
in the United States. Now what what is
interesting from the number that you
gave me is that the um the American
Cancer Society is telling all of us that
we've made tremendous progress in in
managing cancer. And um the I would say
they say we've reduced cancer deaths by
33%. Uh giving the impression that we're
making major advances. In the early
1990s uh the antismoking campaigns were
initiated and uh gradually pe more and
more people stopped smoking because of
peer pressure. uh peer pressure,
secondary smoke was bothering me and
putting me at risk. Therefore, you
better stop smoking. So gradually peer
pressure in the society started to
reduce smoking. And smoking was a major
risk factor for developing cancer. So,
so if people stop smoking, they
projected that if we if our
population did not stop smoking in the
1990s, we would have 33% more dead
people uh than than if we stopped
smoking. So, the the major improvement
in cancer was all all prevention. It had
nothing very little if anything to do
with new with new drugs, new therapies
or any of this kind of stuff. So I I
look at it this way. Um and and people
can take it in different ways. President
Nixon in
1971 declared war on cancer. When when
we when we declare war and we look at
casualties in war, we count bodies and
and and dead people and casualties and
things like this. We don't say, "Oh, we
had a particular engagement in uh
Afghanistan and we had th uh third 36
people uh die per 100,000." That it's
it's absurd. Uh so when you look at uh
1,700 people a day dying from cancer,
that's a number that that's a number of
souls gone from the planet. We don't we
don't divide it by per 100,000 people or
per per numbers of population. we look
at it as dead people. Um so are we
making any advances in cancer only in
the prevention aspect? Uh and now we
understand from new data that the
obesity epidemic is starting to replace
smoking as a major risk factor for
developing cancer. So uh we're re
replacing one risk factor with another
risk factor. And you're right, cancer is
um dramatically increasing and we're not
making any major progress regardless.
All you have to do is look at the dead
number the numbers of dead people. You
know, we don't see the like, oh, we're
seeing 500 people less per year dying
than the last year or something like
this. We just see constant almost
continuous increase in people dying from
cancer. Now, if that's which is horrific
and it's like 20 million worldwide are
dying from cancer. I mean, it's just
like it's not just the United States. In
China, they they I I I I saw a report
where they said 8,100 people a day are
dying from cancer in China. They have a
much larger population obviously. Um but
you still have a lot of people dying in
every country, every advanced country
that we are we are and not everybody
collects accurate data. Uh but the
problem is yes, it's getting worse and
the pharmaceutical industries are are
are uh planning to have even more and
more cancer dead people by by 2050. This
is absurd. Uh this shouldn't happen.
This we can drop those death rates
significantly once we realize that it's
a metabolic disease and not a genetic
disease. So the reason why we're not
making any major advances is because the
National Cancer Institute says that
cancer is a genetic disease. Nothing
could be further from the truth. I don't
know who writes those things. They
obviously don't read the scientific
literature or even understand it because
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease. Uh and we've defined what
what's driving the fuels driving the
disregulated growth and we've developed
therapies and strategies that can uh
restrict those fuels and thereby kill
tumor cells without killing the patient.
So uh the problem is the the whole
entire field is is brainwashed uh into
this idea that cancer is a genetic
disease and as long as that's happening
you're not going to make any major
progress. Yeah. I remember you know
growing up my parents or as we were
learning about cancer and and the deaths
that could arise is to constantly check
for people in your family or your
ancestors that might have had certain
types of cancer, right? Related to let's
say even heart disease. And then based
on that you want to you know try to
prevent it as much as possible. So I
grew up and a lot of people I think grow
up thinking that genetic mutation and
the the history behind your ancestors is
what determines like a large portion of
why you would get
cancer rather than lifestyle. But when
you're talking about this
misunderstanding that we have about
cancer and the fact that it's not based
on um primarily genetic mutation but
it's actually around the mitochondria.
What does that change about how we
treated cancer if assuming that we were
thinking that it's genetic mutation
versus what you're saying which is based
on mitochondrial?
Yeah. Well, let me go back and say why
people thought that it was genetic. Oh,
you know it runs in the family. you
know, some kind of cancer might run in
the family. Therefore, people people
sometimes assume that there's a genetic
risk factor and in some cases it is. Uh
we know there are some inherited risk
factors that that none of them are
perfect. So they're secondary secondary
risk factors, but a lot of those
families live in a common environment as
well. Uh and the common environment
could be impacting. In other words, the
members of that family develop cancer
because they have provocative cancer
um causing um
um agents in that same environment
whether it's a food born or or chemical
born or whatever it is. Uh sometimes so
you mis you misinterpret what you're
seeing. Yes, it runs in families because
families are being exposed to the same
common environment and there are genetic
risk factors, don't get me wrong. Uh but
none of them are 100% penetrant, meaning
they're secondary. Um and and and all of
the ones that we have studied, the
genetic so-called germline uh mutations,
every one of them affects the
mitochondria in one way or another, ma
making mitochondrial dysfunction uh the
prime cause of cancer. Um and and it's
it's you on once you know what the prime
cause is, then you immediately know what
the therapies are to manage it. But when
you realize that um the ankcogenic
paradox was put out by Albert St. Gurgi
a Nobel Prize guy uh who said that there
seems to be so many different
provocative agents that could
precipitate cancer. But what is the
common pathophysiological mechanism that
could link all of these different
provocative agents? For example,
chemical carcinogens. a a a a chemical
is called a carcinogen because it's been
linked to the formation of cancer. Uh
radiation exposure. People fear
radiation because they say you could get
cancer from it. Intermittent hypoxia uh
like from sleep apnnea. Uh systemic
inflammation that's often seen in people
with diabetes and obesity. Um ankcoenic
viruses. uh there are papilloma viruses,
hepatitis C viruses, a variety of
viruses that are linked to the formation
uh of cancer or being older uh genetic
germline risk factors. So, so uh what
was stumbling to the field uh even to
Sid Mukerji who write who wrote the
emperor of all maladies which is a a New
York Times bestseller a pullet surprise
book um he struggled with this he said
what is the common pathophysiological
mechanism that links all of these
different kind of provocative agents
whether it's in the germ line or in the
environment to cause cancer and we
figured that we did we we solved that
problem we showed that every one of
those risk factors
disrupts uh uh energy metabolism,
respiratory energy metabolism in the
mitochondria leading to causing allowing
a compensatory shift in how that cell
gets energy. And that shift is
associated with disregulated cell growth
because the organel the mitochondria
that controls the differentiated state
uh of of the cell is corrupted and the
cell falls back on its default state
which is proliferation. So we we know
pretty clearly what the hell is going on
with cancer. So then when I say
compensatory fermentation, what does the
hell does that mean? Okay, that we found
out the only two fuels that can be
fermented that's generating energy
without oxygen is the sugar glucose and
the amino acid glutamine. And they're
powerfully synergistic with each other.
Uh you have to take both of them away
together to crush down the energy
metabolism in these cancer cells. You
got to realize that without energy,
nothing can grow. You and I can't live
without it. We breathe air. Air has
oxygen. Oxygen fuels the combustibility
of fuels in our body. Okay? And we do it
highly very efficiently. But the cancer
cell doesn't it takes in oxygen but does
not use it for ATP. Okay? It makes these
radicals and causes the mutations in the
nucleus that everybody is focusing on is
downstream effects of the damage to
oxidative phosphorilation. That's one of
the major reason why we're not making
any advances. But once you realize what
the tumor cell needs to survive and
clearly we have interrogated these tumor
cells to know exactly what they can and
cannot use, it becomes clear how to
manage them. You just pull the plug now
on the two fuels that are driving the
disregulated growth and you transition
the whole body over to fatty acids and
ketone bodies which the normal cells can
use but the tumor cells can't.
Therefore, they become checkmated and
die okay without toxicity. So uh people
say wow you know this greatly come you
know I said it's not that complicated
once you understand the players and what
the what the theory and understanding
what the prime cancer is not that
complicated of a disease we have made it
a monster by by cha chasing genes that
are largely irrelevant uh their
downstream effects. So we created a
monster by our lack of understanding of
the biology of the problem. Who's we
though? I mean, I'm curious to dig
deeper into where
this un where this belief that genetic
mutation was the leading cause of cancer
and why your information isn't
abundantly known around the world and
how we're treating cancer. Like where
where's the miscommunication that
happened that for decades that we
thought it was around genetic mutation
in your in your belief? Well, I mean it
was started with Auto Warberg. I mean,
I'm I'm just standing on the shoulders
of Otto Warberg. He he he received the
Nobel Prize in in the 1930s for his work
on the respiratory enzymes in in in
normal cells and he was the one who said
there's something wrong with the
mitochondria in these cancer cells. Uh
and he said the cells have to switch to
a an ancient fermentation. What
fermentation happens in the absence of
oxygen. So, so, uh, like if we run fast,
our muscles, uh, generate energy through
a fermentation and we throw out lactic
acid. If we run really, really fast, our
some of our cells are capable of doing
this. If we have stop breathing uh, or
have a heart attack, uh, we stop getting
oxygen into the body and we see the
markers and we have to, well, then if
we, if we, why are we not dead
instantly? If you take cyanide, that
that causes a permanent shutdown of
oxidative phosphorilation. A permanent
you can't even if you put oxygen back
into the patient, you've gummed up the
oxidative phosphorilation machinery and
that's dead. You don't you there's
nobody that drinks the Kool-Aid full of
cyanide and walks away without any
problem. You're dead. Okay. Okay. But if
you have a heart attack um and you stop
breathing for a certain period of time,
if you don't get the oxygen back into
the body, everybody knows the brain
cells die and you die. But if you get
the oxygen back into the body, the
patient recovers, the individual
recovers by heart massages and all this
stuff. Well, when he's unconscious there
for those few minutes, the bloodstream
fills up with lactic acid and suinic
acid. Okay? uh those are the biomarkers
for uh energy without oxygen. We have
switched our cells in our body to an
alternative source of of energy.
Otherwise, we're going to be dead. So,
but we can only do that for a few
minutes, you know, five minutes at the
most, and then we die. If we get oxygen
back, we we live. Now those biomarkers
which is lactic acid and suxinic acid
that would fill up from a heart attack
or from stopping breathing or whatever
um we see those same biomarkers in
cancer cells in the presence of 100%
oxygen. They shouldn't be fermenting and
using that if they have a good
mitochondria oxidative phosphorilation.
So the cancer cells have been telling us
for decades, I am we're fermenting and
and um this is the way I'm living.
Without energy, I can't live. Where am I
getting my energy? I'm getting it from a
non oxidative source. What is that
source? It's a fermentation. What does
that mean? Means energy without oxygen,
you know, and and and and the cancer
cells are just doing what our what what
our cells evolved to do. Don't forget
all of our cells in our body have the
remnants heirloom pathways that are
there from from 2.5 billion years ago.
All of the cells on the planet were
fermenttors. They had no oxygen in the
atmosphere yet they were dividing in an
uncontrolled way driven by fermentation.
Cancer cells are falling back on these
ancient aeromic pathways and allowing
them to continue to grow and they will
grow as long as you got that fuel as
long as those fuels are there. So now
you know that um okay so the cancer
cells continue to ferment in the
presence of 100% oxygen. Wow. That's
what Warberg said. But Warberg was
thrown under the bus uh because he there
was some uh misunderstanding. They the
other the field the field of
biochemistry and biology said oh cancer
cells take in plenty of oxygen therefore
their oxidative phosphorilation must be
fine. And we have shown that oxygen is
not used for energy. It's used for other
things besides energy. So that was a big
misunderstanding. So there was so much
confusion in the biochemistry area.
Warberg did not know about the
fermentation of an amino acid glutamine
which caused a misunderstandings. Uh
Warberg did not know that the oxygen
consumed by a cancer cell is not linked
to ATP synthesis through oxidative
phosphorilation. But he was right in
saying that the origin of cancer was
mitochondrial dysfunction. He was 100%
correct on that. But the field felt uh
in the 1950s when Watson and Crick came
out with the structure of DNA, the the
entire biology field of biology ran off
uh rightly so chasing uh uh genetic
genes expression. And then when you
started to look at cancer cells, you
said, "Oh, look at the broken
chromosomes. Oh, look at all the
mutations in cancer cells. Oh, genetics,
genetics, genetics. And then we invested
billions of dollars into the cancer
genome project hunting for the mutations
that are supposed to cause cancer. Now,
the there are there are some powerful
experiments to say that those mutations
cannot be the cause of cancer. Uh uh
we're now finding some cancers that have
no mutations. Okay. Well, people can
argue, well, maybe we didn't look hard
enough and okay, well, it's still not
consistent with your sematic mutation
theory. If I use the same technique and
I see thousands of mutations in in some
cancer cells and no mutations in the
other using the same technique,
something is strange here. The other the
other thing too is when you take the
nucleus of the tumor cell and put it
into a normal cytoplasm, you no longer
get disregulated cell growth. So they
said, "Oh, there's something in the
cytoplasm that suppresses disregulated
cell growth." On the other hand, if I
take the tumor nucleus and put it in the
cytoplasm of a of a um I take the I take
the normal nucleus, the nucleus from a
normal cell and put it into the
cytoplasm of a tumor cell, I get
disregulated cell growth. Wow. Okay.
This completely uh throws that it can't
be a genetic. It cannot be a disease
driven by nuclear genes. Okay. And then
they said, "Oh, but only some genes, oh,
only some cause cancer." And we're going
to label them drivers as opposed to
passengers. So the massive field of
cancer genetics started to refine what
they said and said, "Well, not all
mutations cause disregulated cell
growth, only real bad ones, and we call
those drivers." New information is now
coming out of the scientific literature
showing that you, a young guy, uh, you
don't look like you have cancer, but if
we do a genetic screen on some of your
tissues, oh my god, you're full of
driver mutations, but I don't have any
cancer. You put all that together and
you have to be uh you you have to I
don't know if lack knowledge, you you
you have to be an ideologue. you you you
either you either have to be some uh
have some intellectual challenge,
cognitively challenged or an ideologue
to think that cancer is a genetic
disease. However, if you've built your
entire career and being a big dog in
this field and know thinking you know
what you're talking about and you're the
head of some medical school department,
you just can't accept what I just said.
Are you kidding me? I mean, the whole
field is driven by gene the targeted
genes. A multi-billion dollar industry.
You're telling me this might not be
correct. You're absolutely right. We got
1,700 people a day telling us that it's
not correct. And the cancer cells are
telling us what we should be doing and
we're not doing it. So, you tell me what
the problem is. You must not be very
popular amongst those uh circles. I
imagine uh I don't know whether I'm
popular or not. Uh it doesn't make any
difference. We got 1,700 people a day
dying in who cares whether I'm popular
or not. What are we going to do to help
those poor souls? Let's simplify this
for the audience. So maybe people have
some understanding of the differences
between mitochondria dysfunction versus
genetic
mutation. What's the
actual lesson here for people? If
assuming the mitochondria dysfunction is
the primary cause of cancer, what does
this mean for those people that are
trying to prevent cancer or people that
already have cancer? What changes should
they be making based on this information
to get to their goal? Well, you have two
different things here. You have
prevention and then you have treatment.
So, so you have to say, well, what do I
need to do to prevent cancer? Cancer is
very very rare in in normal mito. You
can't we haven't found any tumor yet
that has normal mitochondria. So, one
way to prevent cancer is keep your
mitochondria healthy. Okay. So, but
problem is to do that. People don't want
to do that. Okay? They don't want they
don't want to change their diet and
lifestyle uh and exposure to chem. They
don't want to do that. They don't want
to do our ancestors rarely had cancer.
How do we know that? Because when I say
our ancestors, I'm talking about our
paleolithic ancestors from several
hundred thousand years ago. All right?
These guys were uh hunter gatherers.
They they had a lot of exercise. They
tracked down killed big animals and they
ate they ate a lot of meat. ate whatever
they we're omnivorous. So, we had
tremendous amounts of of exercise. Uh we
had foods that we ate were uh no highly
processed carbohydrates. Um you you have
a very different diet lifestyle. People
say, "Well, how do you know what those
guys did?" Because we have certain me
certain populations of people on the
planet that live live according to their
traditional ways and they never they
rarely have cancer. How do you know
that? Because Albert Schweitzer
documented this, a fa physician
humanitarian. He went into these
primitive tribes in Africa and he was
shocked. Couldn't find anybody with
cancer and yet nobody. No, he looked at
40,000
people 40. We have I don't know if he
found one or two. There there are
certain kinds of there was one kind of
burquettes lymphoma uh which came from a
parasite infection. It was initiated by
parasites but the parasites damage
oxidative phosphorilation leading to
leading to disregulated cell growth. So
you can you can predict how these tumors
are happening but the incidence was
rare. It was very mo much less common
than what you saw in industrialized uh
societies. As a matter of fact in
England in Wales in 18 something 18 oh
um cancer was not the number one killer
of the population. It was it was um uh
it was t tuberculosis and some viral
infections and things like this. And
then the same group of people studied in
the I in the early 2000s I believe I
have the data here somewhere. Um cancer
was like jumped really high uh and much
less tuberculosis and these other
things. So cancer incidence is going up
with industrialized uh societies and
it's happening in all all over the world
and and all of those industrialized
societies were have less less exercise.
We're eating large amounts of highly
processed carbohydrates which never
existed in our past. Um we we have a lot
of emotional stress, poor sleep. We're
putting all of the packages of together
that our ancestors had much less uh when
I say ancestors, our primitive
ancestors. So, we're putting ourselves
at risk uh with the diet and lifestyles
that we have. And that's not mysterious.
The obesity epidemic, as I said, obesity
is now a risk factor replacing smoking.
Okay. Um obesity is linked to type 2
diabetes and systemic inflammation uh
which will damage oxidative
phosphorilation. Uh, obesity is
evolution in action. Uh, our ancestors
were never obese. There was nothing they
could eat to make them obese. Uh,
they're on their they're chasing down
big animals. There's no carbohydrates.
They're they're they have good good
sleep. They live they So, it's a very
very different lifestyle. The people
that are obese today are the descendants
of of our ancestors that survived. Our
bodies are so geared for storing energy
because otherwise we would have been
exterminated as a we would have been
extinct. We would have gone extinct as a
species if we were not able to store
energy. So we are supremely designed
physiologically to store energy. All of
a sudden within a few hundred years
we're in a in an environment strikingly
different from the environment in which
we rose. So our bi biologic biology is
not evolving as fast as our technology.
Therefore, we have an obesity epidemic.
We have all these chronic diseases and
they're and they're and they're they're
cancer caused. Many of them cause
cancer. What about the argument that our
ancestors in the palithic even in the
Neolithic era that didn't necessarily
survive past a certain age. So, people
just were in general were dying a lot
earlier because of various reasons, lack
of antibiotics and so forth, and even
didn't really have much to track whether
they had cancer or not. And this day and
age, we have certain cures that exist
like that would normally have killed us
before. And people are just in general
living longer because of the
advancements of science and technology.
And we're getting better at measuring
cancer rates just because of the data
world that we live in. Are there any
truth to that where just in general
people weren't living as long and that's
why they may not have had cancer?
Um, well, let's let's break it down and
let's think about it a little bit more.
What killed most of those people in
those days? They didn't live as long.
Yeah, you're right. They they died from
infections and injuries. Um there wasn't
orthopedic surgeons to fix a broken hip,
re replace a knee. So those poor guys
that had to track down and kill animals
are not going to be so effective at
that. Right? So think about it.
Injuries and infections were the major
cause of death of our ancestors because
they didn't have antibiotics. They
didn't have the the the the medical
advances in keeping us alive longer. So,
they would die for sure earlier. The
wolf is the same. Okay. The wolf uh uh
dies in the wild from injuries and
infections. All right. All of our
domestic dogs arose from the wolf,
right? So, cancer is the number one
killer of domestic dogs. You have to see
how obese these dogs are. They're eating
the same crap food that we're eating and
they're all getting cancer. They're not
dying from injuries and infections
because we're taking care of them at the
vet. They're dying from cancer because
we're in a new diet and lifestyle issue.
And the primitive tribes that live
according to their traditional ways,
yes, we can have antibodies for these
folks, but they're all very active.
They're all eating natural kinds of
foods. So, so and and and what's more,
uh, we're seeing cancer now exploding
and younger numbers, younger. I can't
tell you how many people in their late
20s and and 30s and early 40s are having
cancer. This is the same age bracket as
our ancestors. So, so you if when you
break it down. Yeah. Uh it was diet and
lifestyle, baby. It there's no other
explanation. We're we're in toxic
environments. We're eating the wrong
foods. We're not exercising. We're all
freaked out sitting in traffic. I mean,
you can put it all together and you got
not only cancer, uh you have type 2
diabetes, you cardiovascular disease,
you have dementia. I mean, let's let's
put it all together here. And uh most of
the chronic diseases are coming from a
rapid advance in in technology. And our
biology has not yet c caught up with
that. And it would probably take
centuries, thousands and thousands of
years for our biology to catch up to our
new environment. Yeah. You previously
talked about a study where you compared
the Inuit diet from using two groups
where one will had the traditional diet
of what those people would normally eat
and then another group of inuits that
had the western diet and you kind of
compare the differences of cancer rates.
Can you talk a little bit about that?
Well, I didn't do that, but I spoke to
the folks that were involved in that in
some way. I gave a lecture at the
medical school in Thunder Bay, Canada.
Uh there's a medical school there that's
that services the Inouit population uh
of Canada. Okay. So um yes,
traditionally the Inouits uh were a
hearty a hearty group. They lived in the
obviously the Arctic Circle area. Their
main diet was um seals and whales and
fish uh and these kinds of things. They
had to expend tremendous amounts of
energy to kill and eat these animals. Uh
fruits and vegetables were minimal. uh
they would be collected during the
warmer seasons and stored uh but still
not a major dietary uh input for those
for those folks. Once once the Inouits
then adapted the diet and lifestyle of
western ways, they now have some of the
most the most most obese people. Uh they
have the highest cardiovascular and
cancer rates among members of the
Canadian population. So clearly uh and
this happened in our own Native American
populations in the United States. Uh
some of the Pueeblo Indians in the 19
diabetes was not heard of when they did
a big study in 1901. Uh I think it was
the Pueblo, one of those Indian tribes
in our western area. Uh they didn't even
know what diabetes was. And now diabetes
is like more than 50% of the population.
As soon as uh the d great the great
American diet and lifestyle enters into
your society, brace yourself, baby,
heart attack, cancer, dementia, all of
these kinds of chronic diseases. It
comes from diet and lifestyle and you
know, okay, there might be a few uh
genetic risk factors, predisposing risk
factors, but they're not the main
they're not the main. It's it's mostly
diet, lifestyle, and exposure to
chemical carcinogens and other other
toxins in the environment. That's it.
You want to prevent that? Okay, change
your diet lifestyle. Guess what? Nobody
wants to do that. So, not nobody, but
certainly you get a lot of people that
say, "Oh man, don't you have any I mean,
look at the uh obesity thing. This drug
comes out oanic. You shoot yourself up
with oanic. Oh, you don't feel hungry
anymore. You lose weight. Uh it's either
that or do water only fasting. What are
you gonna choose? Give me the drug. It's
human nature. We put ourselves at risk
because of our own uh desire to have
quick fixes uh for very complicated uh
or lifestyle changes that may not be as
comfortable as people would like. Yes.
So if you're saying the primary cause of
cancer is mitochondrial health and way
to keep mitochondria health, diet and
lifestyle is such such a big factor to
that. Talk to me about that
specifically. What is the right diet to
have based on your research and how can
people implement that? Well, what's the
right diet? You know, you got a guy
who's a ve a vegan, a guy vegetarian, a
pescatarian, a carnivore, a
Mediterranean. You can be healthy on all
those things. Um, as long as you're in
nutritional ketosis, because that's how
we evolved. We evolved as a species.
What does nutritional ketosis mean? It
it means that you don't have a lot of
blood sugar because you didn't eat
anything that would give you unless you
had type 1 diabetes and that's a
different ballgame alto together. Um
where you don't make enough insulin
because of a virus or a genetic problem
and therefore you have very u you know
you you you can have very high blood
sugars. Um you can then you produce
massive amounts of ketones. But our
normal physiological state is naturally
therapeutic ketosis. Nut I should say
nutritional ketosis. So that means the
ratio of blood sugar to ketone the
ketone bodies are coming from the
mobilization of fat. So we everybody
knows what fat is. We all have some
level of fat in our body. Okay. When we
stop eating fuels um sugar primarily uh
or anything and we we we take those
atapost sites that have triglyceride
fatty acids. They go into the
bloodstream. They go right to our liver
and our liver, it's like putting a
branch uh uh in in a wood chipper. You
chop up the fatty acids into these
water- soluble ketone bodies which now
circulate in our blood. They go right to
the brain. The brain sucking those
things out. The heart will take them. Um
and we have fatty acids that the muscles
and heart will burn and and and we can
get tremendous amounts of energy from
these fuels as long as the mitochondria
are healthy. If the mitochondria are not
healthy, uh we can't use those those
fuels. As a matter of fact, in the tumor
cells, you find them storing these lipid
drops in the cytoplasm. They can't burn
them because the the the machine to burn
them, the engine to burn them is broken.
So, they store in your in the cytoplasm.
So, keeping your mitochondria healthy in
normal cells that are not cancer means
shifting uh uh uh uh energy from from
carbohydrate to fat. And the ketone
bodies are not only that when our
mitochondria burn ketone bodies they
actually reduce the amount of reactive
oxygen species they become super
energetically efficient. As a matter of
fact when we burn ketones we get more
each breath of air we take in we get
more powerdriven energy when you burn
ketones than when you burn carbohydrate.
And this is a bioenergetic principle
that was worked out by my late colleague
Dr. Richard Vch, head of head of the
metabolism branch at the National
Institutes of Health. He worked out him
and and and Krebs of the Krebs cycle.
They they worked out the bioenergetic
efficiency of ketone bodies and our spe
our ancestors were were in generally on
these ketones had some level of ketone
body uh all the time because we were
eating carbohydrates. So um so and you
say to yourself well that keeps your
mitochondria healthy that that uh that
keeps your uh reduced from
cardiovascular disease to all that will
be reduced significantly if your
mitochondria are are doing that. So what
diet the answer is we don't know um uh
all I know is we develop a glucose
ketone index calculator which measures
the ratio of glucose to ketones in the
blood and when the and for cancer
management we go 2.0 zero or below but
for nutritional ketosis you can probably
do six or seven or below uh that number
that's the ratio of gluc so person in
most of our society they would have a
GKI of 50 to 60 which means that wow
yeah glucose
yeah glucose is super high in our
bloodstream and ketones are super low
okay so as you stop eating carbohydrates
and do more excess more and more
exercise all of a sudden the glucose
comes down and the ketones start going
up. And when you have that ratio that's
coming closer to unity, you are now into
the zone that our ancestors, our
longlost ancestors were. The problem is
you're not you're not eating the foods
that that our not going out and killing
the deer on the end of the street or
trying to track down some elephant,
throw, you know, and cut it up and eat
it. But but we have meats uh that we
call organic freerange chickens. Don't
forget our ancestors killed and ate
anything. We we we're omnivorous.
Anything that we could walk, crawl,
flew, grew, uh we we would be able to
prepare it for for uh for food. So,
people always ask me, "What can I eat?
What diet?" I don't know. I said, "Why
don't you experiment on yourself and
find out?" I says, "Go eat bananas and
see what it does to your GKI. If the GKI
is too high, don't eat the damn banana.
You know, it's not that kind."
Everybody, oh, you didn't say what I
should eat. I said, "Eat what you
normally eat. Measure your GKI and if
it's still high, don't eat that. It's
not. And everybody's different. Some
people can't, oh, I can't eat meat.
Okay, then do it on plants and see what
the plants will do for you. The guy
says, "I can never eat a plant." Just
eat karma. Everybody says, "Oh, what can
I eat? What can I don't know for
Christ's sake, just eat just measure
your your GKI and see what you can eat
or not eat." Yeah. Based on your
interviews, um I I actually thought you
were going to push keto pretty hard in
this interview. Um because I know keto
some people I've tried keto I think it
affects people differently like there's
even a study on nature medicine that
talked about how certain people on keto
certain people can have increase in LDL
and it can it can be has been shown to
increase heart disease for some people
but it may work for
others if you sit down in front of a tub
of lard and eat the damn lard all day
long yeah you'll get your ketones up but
you'll also put your body at super uh
risk People are fools. Many of them,
they just go out of their mind thinking,
"Oh, this is important. I got to do
this." They have no clue about the
bioenergetics or how to how to do it
correctly. And that's what gets me
frustrated is that all these people say,
"Oh, you said keto. What the hell? Just
drink water. You can get into ketosis."
You can get the same level. Oh, I don't
want to do that. Okay. Well, then what
do you want to do? I want to eat this.
Okay. See what it does to you, GKI. If
if you're in ketosis, doesn't make a
difference what you're eating. So people
can do it if they're on a carnivore
diet, a vegetarian diet, pescatarian
diet, Mediterranean diet. So they'll
say, "Well, I tried this Mediterranean
diet, but I wasn't able to." Well, eat
less of it for crying out loud. If you
want to see just then drink water for a
week, there'll definitely be down there.
Well, I can't do that. Well, then what
the hell are you talking about then? You
have no clue what you're doing. So, if
you're in nutritional ketosis, you will
get healthy. There's no question about
it. But if you're sitting in front of a
tubalard to raise your ketone bodies at
all going to raise your glucose, too,
like we showed, you're going to be at at
at health risk. So you people who who
say all that stuff don't know what the
hell they're doing or how to do it.
Nutritional ketosis is a natural state
that our bodies were designed to live
in. Okay, that's the way. What can I
eat? I don't know. you everybody has to
try has to be religiously appropriate,
culturally appropriate and restricted in
the amount that will put you into that
because our ancestors and and we also
came from we would gorge on these
feasts. This is how we got Christmas,
New Year, all these different kinds of
feasts because we had an opportunity to
gorge ourselves. But what were we
gorging on? Meat. A lot of meat, right?
I don't know anybody who would sit down
and eat like four bushels of broccoli.
You mean the the the you would gorge
yourself, but the the foods that we eat
were low glycemic foods. Low glycemic
foods. We don't forget we engineered,
this is part of our technology. We
engineered fruits and vegetables to be
higher in sugar. Uh uh I remember when I
was at the University of Illinois, my my
my member of my committee, the late John
Lenon, he discovered um uh the sugary
for locust to make sweet corn. Okay. Um
sweet. Well, you ever have sweet corn?
is delicious, you know, because it has
more sugar in it. But our teioenti, the
ancestral corn, didn't have that. So
they would pound it up and make some
tortilla breads and things like this.
But they were still many complex carbs.
They weren't highly processed carbs. So
all of this comes into the to the
realization of of what you're eating,
how you're eating it, and what it does
to your nutritional state. So I I don't
push ketogenic diets. Uh I I I I push
nutritional ketosis which can happen
from any kind of a diet as long as you
eat the the amount of it and measure the
glucose ketone index. It's you can get
the meter from Amazon now. Um and and
now we're getting uh apps that you can
follow your GKI on your cell phone, you
know, uh and then you'll know and then
you'll start getting healthier and
healthier and doing skip meals. How does
it feel to skip two or three meals?
Maybe one meal a day. Make sure you get
a lot of exercise in. Oh, I don't have
time. People say, "Oh, I don't have time
there because I'm sitting in traffic."
Well, that's your personal misfortune.
Our ancestors weren't sitting in
traffic. They were chasing chasing down
and killing animals, you know. So, um
and that's part of our diet and
lifestyle. We're stuck in this
environment that keeps us in an
unhealthy state and we're suffering for
it. But but the answer is to to keep
yourself cancer free or significantly
reduce the risk not only of cancer,
diabetes, heart disease, dementia, uh
you have to keep your mitochondria
health. And and I'm sorry to say our our
great American diet and lifestyle is is
not part of that's not helping us. It's
not helping us. But as long as people
know that, then they become um u more
scientifically literate. Got it. So
you're not necessarily advocating, as I
mentioned, for like a keto only diet,
but as a as a rule, as kind of a
guidance, it's likely going to be, you
know, avoid the simple carbs, sugar, any
of that stuff. Try to eat more low carb
diet if not, you know, uh complex carbs,
stick to that seems to be like the
general rule. Yeah. Well, just measure
your GKI. That'll tell you if if people
are serious. How how do they measure
that? Because unless if you have a
glucose monitor, uh do you recommend
people having like a like one of those
CGMs, continuous glucose
that that's that certainly can be part
of this. The problem is that does not
measure blood ketone bodies. So you
measure blood ketone bodies by a urine
strip. Uh but that's not accurate
either. It it it it it's not precise.
When we do the glucose ketone index in
the blood, we take a drop of blood like
a person with diabetes would do and they
take a little a stick um uh a sensor
stick. The drop of blood hits the stick,
you put the stick into the machine and
you wait a couple of seconds and then it
reads the blood sugar m level in
milligrams per deciliter. Um and then
you have to convert that. See why uh you
have to convert that to miller. People
say, "Oh, what do I do?" But the the the
Keto Mojo now has made it all easy. You
don't even have to do the division
anymore. So you take another stick that
measures ketone. You squeeze your finger
a little bit more, get another drop of
blood, and put the ketone stick there
and put the stick into the meter and
then push the button and then it gives
you the the amount of ketone in that
drop of blood. Beta hydroxybutyrate is
the ketone body that it's me mentioning
that it's measuring predominantly. And
then you push the button on the meter
and it gives you the ratio of the it
converts the glucose to millimmer and
then gives you the ratio of the two
fuels and that can tell you right there.
So uh it's you know and the and the
meter I think is only like 40 bucks 40
or 50 bucks. What's it called again?
Keto Mojo. Keto Mojo. I don't know if
there might be others out there that
that can do there's others. There's
other meters as far as I know. Uh
precision extra. The problem is you have
to do the division. I don't know if the
if they've incorporated the the the
calculator into the meter. Keto Mojo has
done that. We developed now we didn't
get we couldn't patent any of this
stuff. We didn't make a nickel on any of
this stuff, but the guy's putting it
into the meter and making plenty of
money. So, um so so anyway, yeah, Keto
Mojo uh on Amazon and you can buy it. It
has all the equipment there and it gives
you it tells you what your GKI is. So,
if people want to know what diet they
should try, uh that's fine. Try whatever
diet you like. Eat whatever you like.
Just measure your GKI. And if I told you
that you need to get below 10 to be in
somewhat level of nutritional ketosis,
below six would be great. If you have
cancer, below two is better because then
you start hammering and killing the
tumor cells. Um there's nutritional
ketosis and then there's therapeutic
ketosis. Therapeutic ketosis is a level
lower. So you're really pushing those
sugars down. Then you go out and
exercise significantly and that and that
also takes the sugar out of the blood.
It's taking the sugar out of the blood
for further pushing those sugars down.
Brain takes most of the glucose, not the
tumor. But if you now if you have very
high levels of sugar, the tumor is fat
and happy getting all the sugar it needs
growing like crazy or continuing to
grow. So um so you but you want to keep
your mitochondria healthy. So let's say
you have no cancer, you just want to
make sure you don't get cancer. Then
occasionally you put yourself into these
ketoic states. Skip a meal or two. uh do
exercise, you know, eat foods that are
low in carbohydrates like meat and and
things like there's some vegetables that
are low glycemic vegetables. Low
glycemic fruit is grapefruit. Okay, so
we did this when I worked in the
epilepsy field. We would have to monitor
blood sugars in these pediatric epilepsy
kids and and grapefruit would give you
plenty of vitamin C without jacking your
blood sugar up. So, so, um, all of these
things have to be recognized and, uh,
it's just not sitting down in front of a
tubalard and eating this and saying,
"Oh, I got cardiovascular disease." They
smashed that lot on that guy's head. He
has no clue what the hell he's doing.
So, put bury his face in there. I mean,
you got to have a few functional brain
cells if you want to know what to do,
you know, and and that's why I call
scientific literacy is absolutely
essential. And that's unfortunately that
seems to be on short supply for people
in most parts of the c world I would
say. Yeah. Uh we so we covered diet you
mentioned skipping meals. So talk to me
about fasting and particularly around
the differences between the effects of
our glucose at least related to to
cancer between intermittent fasting
versus prolong fasting. How effective is
intermittent fasting? because I
understand there's not a like a lot of
high quality randomized clinical trials
around humans. Um sharing about how
intermittent fasting can actually affect
cancer. I know there's done in mice,
maybe pigs. Um what are the effects of
intermittent fasting versus prolong
fasting based on studies we found? Well,
don't forget we we evolved in both of
those states. Um, we would
intermittently fast uh between between
feasts, between big kills.
Um, you think how hard it was for our
ancestors to kill a buffalo or or a deer
or an elephant. Um, you're not going to
run out and do that every single day.
You're you're trying to try to store the
meat as long as you can. Uh, and
whatever tuber or vegetable you might
have, you're going to be doing that. And
you're not eating you're not eating
three meals a day. uh you might be
nibbling on things on things here and
there but then but then under long fasts
this is how we evolved we evolved to do
long fasts there were times when uh we
would have to go weeks uh without
without food um and people said well
you'll be dead no you won't my good
friend colleague u George Cahill from
the Joslyn Diabetes Center they didn't
they did long-term fasting on people uh
they have the longest guy who fasted was
um Angus Barbari from Scotland. He went
377 days without eating. Uh now he weigh
he was morbidly obese. Uh but he did
it's documented. It's in the scientific
literature. Uh you can read about him.
Um he he lost I don't know several
hundred pounds over this over a year
over a year of not eating. George had
one guy six six months without food. Uh
just drinking water. Uh okay. And he he
lost his job. He was a postman. Got too
fat. Couldn't deliver the message. the
male. Wow. Uh went on Yeah. And they put
them on this special water only diet for
six months. Of course, you take some
vitamin supplements, but not many
because we store vitamins in our fat. We
have a lot of fat and we store them in a
liver and with minerals in the bone. Our
bodies are supremely designed to
function without food for long periods
of time. However, skinny people uh I
wouldn't say called skinny, I should say
normal weight people. Um we we we have
um in the blood you'll notice that when
you fast, fasting we call therapeutic
fasting. But therapeutic fasting,
prolonged therapeutic fasting will
slowly drift into what we call
starvation. Uh fasting therapeutic
fasting is healthy. Starvation is
pathological. you start then dissolving
muscle tissue. You should never fat
spares muscle. Fat is a way to to keep
our muscles and proteins uh uh there. Uh
we spare the proteins by burning the
fat. When the fat starts to dissipate,
now we have to attack uh the protein.
That puts us at risk uh for uh
starvation. Starvation is a pathological
state. Uh and we don't ever want to get
to that state. And the when you know
that you can start seeing amino acids
rising in your blood because you're
breaking down protein now. But uh but
that's like you to do that you have to
go like um maybe 50 or 60 days uh of
water only. And people say well that's
crazy. Of course it's crazy. You're
starving. You're you're going into
starvation. But we're we're now it's
very hard to go cold turkey on this
whole thing. So when I say that means,
oh, I'm going to eat a big meal today
and I think I'm not going to eat any
food for the next three or four days.
Just drink water. Your body is going to
have a tremendous reaction against this.
Okay? Because our brains are glucose
addicted. It's like cocaine, nicotine.
It has a powerful addictive effect on on
our behavior. Uh yeah, you can do 24
hours. You start drifting into 48 hours
and you start getting cranky a and
upset. And then the third day you're
miserable. You're saying, "Well, I don't
want to do this." Okay. So, so and they
say, "Well, most people drop it. They
can't do it anymore." I said, "Well,
this is too too too too dramatic." But
what we do for the cancer people, my co
my physician colleagues, is that we have
to transition the cancer patient away
from glucose to ketones. So, what we do
is slowly transition that person into a
zero carbohydrate, very low carbohydrate
diet. your body starts to acclimate to
the fact of sugar not being there, but
we're not depriving you of calories. So,
the calories will subserve a lot of the
functions, but we're we're taking a cra
the craving of glucose breaking it down.
Then, once you get into the low GKI, you
can jump into water only fasting without
any traumatic problems to your body.
You've already become adapted to this
and it's not so it's not so dramatic
change. So again, it's the adaptation of
taking advantage of the flexibility of
our physiological systems to do this
naturally. Our paleolithic ancestors had
no choice. They didn't become glucose
addicted only because there was no gl
food high glucose foods in the
environment to make them glucose
addicted. They were always in ketosis.
Now, did they want to be there? Of
course not. If you gave them a a big
pizza and a and a chalupa or some of
these things, I mean, they pound it down
like they'd see no tomorrow. They'd be
killing each other for this stuff. But
because they, oh, this is a miracle. My
brain is like beautiful feelg great. But
now we're stuck in an environment where
we have all this stuff at 247 at our
hands and we're putting ourselves at
risk for all this kind of stuff. All you
have to science, you have to know
physiology and biochemistry
unfortunately and most important
evolutionary biology. And these
unfortunately are the subjects that a
lot of people don't don't know or or or
don't understand.
Yeah. I wonder if there's any um
research based on what's the average our
ancestors would normally fast for
between meals because a lot of people,
you know, intermittent fasting has
become this big trend where people are
fasting for 14 hours, 16 hours, 18
hours, 20 hours. But I don't actually
know if there's any effects when it
comes to cancer. meaning is 12 hours or
14 hours actually enough to make some
sort of a meaningful
impact on cancer reduction versus
prolong fasting? Well, I think you have
to look at the glucose ketone index. I I
think some people take longer to reach a
GKI of therapeutic ketosis than another
person. Um, and sex is different too.
Women are much better at doing this than
men. So, uh, I think that's because they
carry more body fat. It was a it was a
evolutionary conserved adaptation for
energy for the child for childbearing.
Men have more muscle because their job
was to kill and and and and get the
food. Women store the energy better for
childbearing. So there's sexual
differences, gender I should say, gender
differences in in doing this as well.
It's all based on our individual
physiology. Uh so the answer to your
question is I don't know a and it would
have to be on an individual basis and
maybe people who would want to study
large numbers uh I I I worked with some
Chinese groups where they were looking
at the effects of water only fasting for
a week and our another colleague um uh
Isabella Cooper from London is doing
these kinds of studies and and what
she's doing she's putting patients um
into these the states of therapeutic
ketosis and she's doing a very kind of
opposite study. It's very interesting.
She'll take her uh her her subjects and
bring them into a state of of of of
nutritional ketosis by intermittent
fasting or longer
fasting and and looking at all the blood
biomarkers, her HDL, LDLs, all the
different
uh micronutrients, macronutrients and
seeing after a month or two in this
state now let them eat high carbohydrate
diets and see how fast it knocks out
knocks all of the all of the markers out
of out of normaly by shifting from it's
almost like going from our uh um
paleolithic state uh switching quickly
to a western diet state and see how fast
it knocks out all all of the parameters
from a what we call healthy zones. So
it's just like the opposite of of what
other people do. But but the answers to
your questions are are are slowly coming
from various kinds of controlled
experiments and things like this. Uh but
everybody can do it themsel. Each person
can be their own control in in knowing
it for themselves what their bodies how
long it takes them to get into these
zones and then they have their own. They
can't compare it with some other guy in
a different country eating different
foods. Do it with your own self. You
have your control. I'm eating every day
whatever I eat. Three meals a day. A lot
of processed car carbs, no. Okay. Then
then let's switch your diet and see how
long it takes you to enter into
nutritional ketosis. Do intermittent, do
a little extended, I don't know. Do
whatever people want to do. Yeah. It's
got to be personal to you, right? That
makes sense. Yeah. It's a personalized
therapy.
Um, so beyond lifestyle, diet, all that
stuff. Um, talk to me about treatments
or supplements even. You know, Metformin
obviously is quite popular for people
with diabetes and it's meant to treat
glucose. People are starting to take it
now. It doesn't it doesn't work that
way. It works through increasing uh uh
oxidative stress in the tumor cell.
Metformin if you have a blood sugar of
320 milligrams per deciliter and you
give metformin and bring it down tound
110 uh you you've brought your blood
sugar down way but that's to kill cancer
cells you got to get those blood sugars
down much further than that and
metformin then interferes with that. So
uh it's only uh we we did these studies
you start getting lactic acidosis uh
when you take when you put people in we
did it in the mice when you put the mice
in in fasted states and then give them
metformas they were getting sick from
lactic acidosis but metformin could be
therapeutic uh by by a mechanism not
related to the glucose levels. they they
itself can cause uh um oxidative stress
in the in the cells uh which can then
kill them by oxidative stress which is
independent of glucose. So there's a lot
of things that need to be known about
that.
Yeah, I guess I there's people that I
would trust online that are are are
taking that but um yeah, it's
interesting to hear that. Well, you can
take it. I I I mean for di for type two
diabetes for sure uh it'll lower your
blood sugar. Um you know, so will a
Zanic. you just anything that will make
you nauseated, you don't feel like
eating, your blood sugar is going to go
down, right? I mean, when you take a
drug that says, "Oh, man, I feel like
I'm nauseated." Well, you're not going
to sit down and eat a nice I you don't
feel like eating. So, um, veagal nerve
stimulation will do the same thing.
So, you would say the same thing about
ompic. It's not like going to prevent
cancer. Well, it could because Yeah, it
could. It could definitely. I don't know
what it might make your mitochondria if
you're elevating your blood ketone
levels and lowering your blood sugar. It
could be therapeutic. I I haven't seen
uh papers looking at at GKI levels from
people with oampic. Uh but maybe it's
out there. I I just may not have seen it
yet, but but they're talking about it
being a good uh against diab type 2
diabetes. Yeah. Which is uh metabolic in
in homeostasis. You're out of metabolic
homeostasis with diabetes. You have too
high of a blood sugar. Okay. You get
sick. You get nauseated. You're not
going to eat. Your blood sugar is going
to go down. How complicated is that? Got
it. Makes sense. Makes sense. Whatever
gets you to the goal, right? Yeah. Um
people want people would prefer oanic
rather than doing water only fasting.
I'll tell you that much. I agree. I 100%
agree. Yeah.
Um what about NAD precursors? uh there's
people that you know talk about M&N or
NR that can increase you know or or be
positive effects of mitochondrial health
and you're saying mitochondrial
dysfunction is causing cancer. So is
there any we're not we're looking into
some of that now. Yeah, we're looking
into some of that now but I can't I
can't be definitive because I don't I
don't have the I don't have the outcomes
of the experiments. Um then it takes a
long time. Is it promising? I don't
know. I I I I can't say I can't say that
for sure. Uh because I haven't looked at
all the data and we haven't done all the
control experiments that need to be
done. And maybe it will be, maybe it
won't be. I I I don't know. Um but but
we're we're we're thinking about some of
that, but we're not we're not we have no
no statement I can make one way or the
other. Yeah. So, it's I mean, I'm not
trying to say we're abdicating it, but I
don't know what's the downside of taking
NR or M&M,
you know, measure your glucose ketone
index and see what it does, you know.
Yeah, that that's the point of truth. We
always go back to the uh GKI. Yes. I
mean, it's a quantitative measure. It's
a quantitative blood measure in you. So,
uh you know, and let people know if it
does something uh that in that regard.
And if it doesn't, I don't know, maybe
it works through a placebo effect. Who
knows? You know, but uh you know, all
this. Well, I appreciate you, Professor
Cipher. I I I think this is such a
fruitful conversation. Um where can
people find you? I know you have a book
out that I want people to check out,
which we'll link below, but it's called
the right book. Make sure it's the right
book. Um because I've written only one
book and yet on the web, you'll see all
these summaries of my work. That's I
didn't do that. I've seen that. Yeah.
Yeah. I will make sure it's the right
book. We try to purge those off the this
the different sites because there's
people that everybody wants to make a
buck on somebody's I I wish I could do
that. I wish I could make the money on
these things like these other guys are
doing. All of our research is supported
by philanthropy and private foundations.
So um there are there and what we do is
when people make a nice donation uh and
we publish our peer-reviewed scientific
papers uh we acknowledge the names of
these people. So when you see our papers
and you can go online and you can put my
name in and you can see our open access
papers, our press pulse par all the
stuff that I've just told you is
published. It's already published in the
scientific literature. So people say uh
okay well who how do I get acknowledged?
Okay well you look this on the bottom of
the papers there's an acknowledgement
section and it acknowledges the
foundations and the people that support
our work. So when you see all these
names who the hell are all these people?
Those are the people that are supporting
the work that was done in that paper.
And there are some people that say, I
just want to be part of this paradigm
change. It's happening. It's going to
happen. It's going to be a worldwide
shift in the way we view health uh and
disease, especially related to cancer.
And some people say, I just want to be
part of the problem. I And in other
words, I don't care if I make somebody
will say, I don't really care if I'm
going to make a billion dollars on what
he's what he's doing. I just want to
know I was part of it. And it's going to
happen. There's no question because we
have the hard scientific evidence to
support what we're saying. Uh and this
is based on
bioenergetics. Um so it's these are
foundational principles of evolutionary
biology and how cells work uh based on
these um chemical and energetic
principles and uh and once you and once
you know how to wield the power of these
things, you're going to get tremendous
tremendous outcomes. Yeah. Well, I'm
very hopeful and optimistic about where
the future of cancer is going because
it's not been good. so far. But I think
like this we can we can we can make a
right angle change on that whole thing.
Uh but you said the powers in place, the
confirmation bias, the dogmatic
ideology, the threat to industries, all
of these things will stand in the way
until they can figure out how to become
integrated into the new change. Yes,
sir. Yeah, very helpful. I appreciate
the conversation, Thomas. Uh Professor
Seafood, appreciate it. Yeah. Well,
thank you very much and it was a
pleasure speaking with you. Awesome.
Thank you.